=== PAGE 1 ===
Code Semantic Zooming
Jinsheng Ba
ETH Zurich
Sverrir Thorgeirsson
ETH Zurich
Zhendong Su
ETH Zurich
Abstract—Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs)
have introduced a new paradigm for software development,
where source code is generated from natural language prompts.
While this paradigm significantly boosts development produc-
tivity, building complex, real-world software systems remains
challenging because natural language offers limited control over
the code generation process. Inspired by the historical evolution
of programming languages toward higher levels of abstraction,
we advocate for a high-level abstraction language that gives
developers greater control over LLM-assisted code writing. To
this end, we propose Code Semantic Zooming (CodeZoom), a
novel approach based on pseudocode that allows developers to
iteratively explore, understand, and refine code across multiple
layers of semantic abstraction. In a within-subjects user study
(n=26), our method matches a state-of-the-art coding agent,
Claude Code, on usability while producing a large effect on code
comprehension: over 90% of participants reported feeling more
in control of design decisions when using CodeZoom compared
to using Claude Code. On objective multiple-choice questions
about participants’ own implementations, an exploratory mea-
sure added mid-study, a subset of participants (n=16) answered
56% of comprehension questions correctly with CodeZoom,
compared with 9% with Claude Code (Wilcoxonp=.005).
Index Terms—LLM coding, program comprehension, pseu-
docode
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, the paradigm of code writing has under-
gone a substantial shift driven by Large Language Models
(LLMs) [11], [27], [53]. Natural language, most commonly
English, has effectively become a new programming language.
Developers provide specifications or requirements in natural
language prompts, and LLMs generate the corresponding
source code. This transformation reduces manual coding effort,
allowing developers to focus on higher-level tasks such as
design and problem-solving. The approach was termedvibe
coding[50] and has been rapidly integrated into modern
coding tools, including Codex [45], Cursor [47], Gemini
CLI [48], Claude Code [44], and Copilot [46].
However, natural language offers insufficient control over
the code generation process, making it difficult to develop
sophisticated real-world software projects using vibe coding
alone. The first challenge lies in intention expression. Unlike
traditional programming languages such as Python or C, which
provide precise syntax and semantics, natural language is
inherently ambiguous, underspecified, and context-dependent.
This ambiguity often leads to misinterpretations of require-
ments, resulting in code that diverges from the developer’s
true intent. The second challenge is code comprehension. Al-
though LLMs can generate syntactically correct and seemingly
plausible code, there is no guarantee of semantic correctness
Prompt: Implement a 2048 game with AI support.
User Interface LLM Source Code
Fig. 1. Existing vibe-coding and CODEZOOMto implement a 2048 game.
or alignment with user intent in natural language. While
LLM-generated summaries can provide partial assistance, fully
understanding and refining the underlying program logic re-
mains difficult. Developers must still rely on testing or manual
inspection to ensure that the generated code satisfies functional
requirements. These difficulties are amplified by the iterative
nature of software development, where code is continuously
revised to add or modify features. Vibe coding offers little
control over code generation in such settings. Even if each
iteration achieves a correctness rate of 95%, repeated rounds of
generation will compound errors, ultimately reducing overall
correctness to an unacceptable level.
We envision the need for a high-level abstract language
to provide greater controllability in LLM-assisted code writ-
ing. Such a language must remain as intuitive as natural
language while encoding the structural scaffolding necessary
to guide and constrain code generation. While various for-
malisms could serve this purpose, we instantiate this concept
using pseudocode. Because pseudocode is ubiquitous, modern
LLMs already possess a robust, pre-trained understanding of
its semantics. Pseudocode [35] offers a high-level, human-
readable description of program logic that blends natural
language with formal programming constructs. Leveraging
this dual accessibility, we establish a bidirectional trans-
lation mechanism between executable source code and its
pseudocode. However, traditional pseudocode is inherently
static and cannot capture code semantics at varying levels
of granularity. To address this limitation, we proposeCode
Semantic Zooming(CODEZOOM), a grammar-driven approach
arXiv:2510.06452v3  [cs.HC]  30 Jun 2026

=== PAGE 2 ===
that leverages LLMs to dynamically adjust the abstraction
level of pseudocode. This approach makes the generated code
more controllable, offering both human interpretability and
machine guidance.
Figure 1 presents a motivating example of comparing a pure
vibe coding tool with CODEZOOMfor writing code. While an
LLM can generate standard games from pre-trained knowledge
alone, the limitations of pure natural language prompts become
critical when addressing novel feature requests where pre-
trained knowledge falls short.
As shown in the upper half of Figure 1, users write natural-
language prompts directly to generate source code. One might
provide the prompt “Implement a 2048 game with AI support”.
However, this prompt can be interpreted in multiple ways, such
as whether the AI should fully automate gameplay or merely
provide hints to human players. Such distinctions are difficult
to express unambiguously in natural language by humans. In
contrast, as shown in the lower half of Figure 1, CODEZOOM
provides an interface in which users write and edit pseudocode,
which LLMs then translate into source code. Operating on
pseudocode rather than natural language reduces ambiguity
by allowing explicit specification of structural controls such
asifandelse. For example, users can clearly indicate that
the AI should perform fully automatic gameplay, as a mode
distinct from human play. For code validation, CODEZOOM
translates the generated source code back into pseudocode,
making it explicit that the AI operates as a separate play mode
rather than merely providing next-step hints. In addition, the
abstraction level of the pseudocode can be adjusted to be more
fine- or coarse-grained, enabling users to inspect details at the
desired granularity.
We implemented CODEZOOMas a set of skills, which are
pre-packaged folders of task-specific instructions for LLM-
based coding agents, totaling roughly 2,000 lines, and devel-
oped it on top of Claude Code. Because the skill interface
is portable, the same implementation can be readily adapted
to other agents such as Codex. To evaluate the approach,
we conducted a within-subjects user study with 26 graduate
students, each of whom completed two programming tasks:
implementing a 2048 game from scratch and reproducing a
real feature request in an open-source codebase. CODEZOOM
was rated as usable as the Claude Code baseline (SUS69.0
vs.71.3,p=0.62) while delivering substantial gains in code
comprehension: on a 7-point Likert item, participants rated
their understanding of the codebase at5.50with CODEZOOM
versus3.35with Claude Code (p<0.001, Cohen’sd=1.02),
and on objective multiple-choice questions about their own
implementations, participants answered 56% of comprehen-
sion questions correctly under CODEZOOMversus 9% under
Claude Code (Wilcoxonp=.005), and over 90% of partic-
ipants reported feeling more in control of design decisions
when using CODEZOOMrather than Claude Code.
Overall, we make the following contributions:
•We propose a pseudocode approach CODEZOOMfor
LLM-assisted code writing.
•We introduce Code Semantic Zooming, enabling dynamic
control over the granularity of pseudocode.
•A user study (n= 26) demonstrates the code-generation
controllability gained by CODEZOOM.
II. BACKGROUND
The evolution of programming is defined by a continuous
drive toward higher abstraction, aiming to improve expres-
siveness and maintainability. Early machine and assembly
languages offered precise hardware control but were tedious
and error-prone. The advent of high-level languages like FOR-
TRAN [5] and COBOL [36] marked a transformative shift,
abstracting machine details to democratize software creation
and let developers focus on problem-solving.
As software complexity escalated, new paradigms emerged
to manage it. Structured programming [12], [15] and C [34]
introduced disciplined control flows, while declarative ap-
proaches [13], [28] prioritized computational goals over ex-
ecution steps. Object-oriented programming (OOP) [22], [33],
[40] further enabled modular, reusable architectures by encap-
sulating state and behavior. Today, multi-paradigm languages
like Python and Rust [18], [41] dominate, allowing developers
to seamlessly blend these styles and, aided by robust package
ecosystems [14], drastically accelerate productivity.
Recently, large language models (LLMs) have pushed ab-
straction further, elevating natural language to a primary
interface. Unlike Knuth’s literate programming [24], which in-
tertwined explanatory prose with human-written source code,
modern “vibe coding” [50] relies on models to translate plain-
language goals directly into execution. This freedom, however,
comes at a cost: natural language is inherently ambiguous and
underspecified, making it hard to precisely control generated
code, validate its correctness, and iteratively refine it for
complex systems.
In this work, we argue that the next step in this trajectory
should combine natural language with structured, semantically
meaningful representations, preserving the expressiveness of
natural language while reintroducing the controllability needed
for robust LLM-assisted code writing.
III. APPROACH
In this section, we introduce Code Semantic Zooming
(CODEZOOM), an approach that enables multiple layers of
semantic abstraction of source code using pseudocode, aiming
to enhance the controllability of LLM-assisted code writing.
a) Approach overview:Figure 2 presents an overview
of CODEZOOM. Suppose we are given a code repository
containing four source code files. CODEZOOMadds a pseu-
docode representation for each source code file and establishes
a bidirectional translation between pseudocode and source
code, enabling users to inspect and refine source code through
pseudocode. In addition, CODEZOOMconstructs a navigation
file that organizes the overall execution flow across all files. A
typical use case begins with developers browsing the naviga-
tion file to understand the repository-level execution flow ( 1⃝).
Next, in 2⃝, they navigate to the specific pseudocode file of

=== PAGE 3 ===
Code Files
Pseudocode
Developers
1
2
3
Navigation
4
Repository
Fig. 2. An overview of CODEZOOM. The system abstracts each code file into
a corresponding pseudocode layer. Developers utilize a navigation mechanism
to locate specific pseudocode, serving as an interface to interact with and
control the corresponding source code.
interest. Finally, in 3⃝, users interact with the pseudocode by
dynamically zooming in to inspect detailed logic or zooming
out to abstract away low-level details for a higher-level view.
This mechanism helps users quickly locate the parts of the
code that require modification. Once the desired changes
are expressed in pseudocode, they are propagated back to
the source code, as shown in 4⃝. The pseudocode is then
regenerated from the revised code, allowing users to iteratively
verify and refine program semantics until the implementation
fully aligns with their intent.
b) Application scenarios:CODEZOOMtargets two typi-
cal application scenarios across software development.
Scenario 1: Initializing a new code repository.When initi-
ating a new project, developers often start with a high-level
design but struggle to maintain control as the implementation
grows in scale and complexity, where LLM-generated code
frequently drifts away from the intended architecture. With
CODEZOOM, developers can first convert their high-level
design into coarse-grained pseudocode that captures key logic.
They then translate the pseudocode into executable source
code and progressively zoom in to refine details. This top-
down workflow keeps developers in charge of design decisions
while delegating routine implementation to LLMs, thereby
enhancing the controllability of LLM-assisted code writing.
Scenario 2: Revising an existing code repository.When
developers need to modify an unfamiliar code project, such
as adding a feature or fixing a bug in an open-source project
from GitHub, they typically face a steep comprehension barrier
across hundreds of files. With CODEZOOM, the navigation file
offers an immediate high-level view of the execution flow,
allowing developers to quickly locate the relevant files. They
can then inspect the corresponding pseudocode at a com-
Listing 1. An example of code repository using CODEZOOM.
.
|--
 README.md
\--
 src
|--
 navigation.md
|--
 main.py
|--
 main.py.pseu
|--
 board.py
|--
 board.py.pseu
\--
 AI
|--
 navigation.md
|--
 expectimax.py
|--
 expectimax.py.pseu
fortable level of abstraction, zooming in only on the regions
that require modification. Edits expressed in pseudocode are
propagated back to the source code, sparing developers from
wading through unfamiliar low-level syntax while ensuring
that changes faithfully reflect their intent.
We explain below how to navigate to specific files and
interact with them when using CODEZOOM.
A. Navigation to the Code Files
Listing 1 presents an example code repository using CODE-
ZOOM, which contains the code for a 2048 game. CODEZOOM
augments the repository with two categories of auxiliary files,
both highlighted in grey in Listing 1: a “navigation.md” file
in each subfolder, which provides an overview of all code
files in that directory, and a “ *.pseu” file, which contains
the pseudocode abstraction of each source code file. Users
can traverse the “navigation.md” files to locate the specific
pseudocode files they are interested in.
Figure 3 shows the content of “navigation.md” under the
subfolder “src/” in the example repository from Listing 1. A
navigation file consists of two parts: a file list and an execution
flow. The first part enumerates all files and subfolders in the
current directory, each accompanied by a brief description
of its functionality. This enables readers to quickly form a
high-level understanding of the role of each file. The second
part presents the execution flow across files and subfolders,
allowing readers to grasp the overall program structure and
locate relevant code. In Figure 3, execution begins at the entry
point in “main.py”, where the program first checks whether
the user has selected AI mode or human mode to play the
game. If AI mode is selected, the program invokes code in
the subfolder “AI/” to run the automatic game-playing strategy
powered by AI algorithms. In both modes, board-related logic
is handled by “board.py”. For example, if a user is interested
in the detailed logic of human mode, we could proceed directly
to the source-code file “main.py”.
B. Writing Code Files
After locating the target source code file through the
navigation files, we open the corresponding pseudocode file
and perform inspection and revision. This process involves
four stages: converting source code into pseudocode, semantic
zooming on the pseudocode, revising the pseudocode, and

=== PAGE 4 ===
Fig. 3. “src/navigation.md” in Listing 1.
synchronizing changes from the pseudocode back to the source
code file. In our example, we open “main.py.pseu”, as shown
in Figure 4.
a) Pseudocode generation:Each pseudocode representa-
tion is generated by CODEZOOMfrom its corresponding code
file. To support semantic zooming over the pseudocode, we
define a formal grammar for the representation, as described in
Section IV. The translation is performed by LLM-based coding
agents, such as Claude Code and OpenAI Codex. Specifically,
the prompt provides the pseudocode grammar together with
an example. In Figure 4, the generated pseudocode is shown
in the top-left corner.
b) Semantic zooming:Given the pseudocode, users ex-
pand or collapse specific portions to focus on the semantic
logic most relevant to their goals if necessary. This step
is also done by LLM-based coding agents, allowing users
to provide prompts flexibly. In Figure 4, suppose we are
curious about what algorithm is implemented for the AI
mode, we could zoom in on line 10. Specifically, users
main.pymain.py.pseu LLM
Fig. 4. The bidirectional relationship between “main.py” and its pseudocode
“main.py.pseu” from Listing 1. An LLM facilitates seamless conversion
between the source code and pseudocode. Developers interact with the system
by zooming in/out and directly modifying the pseudocode.
could provide the prompt: “Clarify the AI mode in line
10 at main.py.pseu” to CODEZOOM. Then line 10 in the
pseudocode is expanded to lines 10–14 in the bottom-left
corner code block. Users could further adjust the abstraction
level of the pseudocode until the semantic logic most relevant
to their goals is clear enough.
c) Pseudocode Revision:Given the adjusted pseudocode,
users may revise it to achieve their goals. This step can
be performed either manually or by LLM-based coding
agents. It is the core user-interaction step in CODEZOOM
and the most significant distinction from the user interface
of pure LLM-based coding agents. For example, in Fig-
ure 4, suppose we would like to add a next move sug-
gestion for human mode, we could manually insert one
line “suggest next move based on a simple heuristic al-
gorithm” before line 11 in the “main.py.pseu (zoom in)”
in the bottom-left corner of Figure 4. Alternatively, we
could instruct an LLM to perform the revision using the
prompt: “I want to use a simple heuristic algorithm
to suggest next move for human mode in main.py.pseu.”
d) Pseudocode-code sync:After the pseudocode is mod-
ified, the changes are propagated back to the source code,
and the pseudocode is also re-generated from the revised
source code. Both steps are done by LLM-based coding agents
automatically. To record the changes in the pseudocode, we
create a backup file for each pseudocode file. When the
pseudocode file is modified, we can compare it to the backup
to observe the modified context and pass it to the LLM-

=== PAGE 5 ===
based agents. In Figure 4, CODEZOOMmaintains a backup
file, ‘.main.py.pseu”, which does not include lines 10–14 of
‘main.py.pseu”. CODEZOOMthen compares the differences
between the two files and uses them to guide LLMs in revising
the corresponding source code file. Afterwards, CODEZOOM
regenerates the pseudocode from the revised source code to
reflect the latest version of the program. This is particularly
useful when LLMs do not correctly update the source code
according to the pseudocode changes, as users can further
inspect the regenerated pseudocode and perform another round
of revision. We argue that CODEZOOMprovides an efficient
communication channel between humans and LLMs, enabling
a controllable and effective refinement process for code writing
using LLMs.
C. Implementation
We implemented CODEZOOMas a set of skills. Skills are
pre-packaged folders that contain best practices and task-
specific instructions for LLM-based agents. Each skill in-
cludes aSKILL.mdfile that stores condensed guidance ac-
cumulated through iterative experimentation, helping LLMs
produce higher-quality outputs for specific tasks. Skills are
widely supported by existing LLM-based coding agents, such
as Claude Code and Codex. We developed our implementation
on top of Claude Code, one of the most popular coding agents.
Because the skill interface is portable, we believe CODEZOOM
can be adapted by other agent frameworks.
IV. PSEUDOCODEGRAMMAR
A. Motivation
Pseudocode has traditionally been an informal description
of program semantics and logic. As a result, there is no
universally accepted standard grammar. While this informality
benefits human readers, it is insufficient for our setting; the
complete lack of grammar introduces architectural ambiguity
that LLMs frequently misinterpret during semantic zooming.
To resolve this, we adopt a semi-formal approach. We intro-
duce a grammar designed strictly to constrain the program’s
control flow (e.g., loops and conditionals), providing the LLM
with unambiguous architectural boundaries. Meanwhile, the
operational steps within these structures remain unconstrained,
informal natural language strings. This ensures the pseudocode
remains as easy for humans to read as traditional informal
styles, while providing enough structural scaffolding to guide
and constrain LLM code generation.
B. Grammar
To formally specify the grammar, we adopt Extended
Backus–Naur Form (EBNF) [32], which provides a precise
yet concise notation for expressing context-free grammars.
Listing 2 presents the resulting pseudocode grammar in EBNF.
The pseudocode consists of three major components:Goal,
Dependencies, andSteps.Goalis a one-sentence summary
that captures the high-level semantics of the source code.
Dependenciesis a list of other code files on which the current
file depends. It enables users to navigate to related files when
Listing 2. The grammar of pseudocode in EBNF.
Pseudocode::=Goal Dependencies Steps
Goal::= 'GOAL:'Description';'
Dependencies::= 'Dependencies:'Description';'
Steps::= 'STEPS:' (Statement)+
Statement::=SimpleStmt
|WhileStmt
|IfStmt
|ForStmt
SimpleStmt::=Description';'
WhileStmt::= 'while' '('Cond')' '{' (Statement)+
'}'
IfStmt::= 'if' '('Cond')' '{' (Statement)+ '}'
( 'elif' '('Cond')' '{' (Statement)+ '}'
)*
('else' '{' (Statement)+ '}')?
ForStmt::= 'for' '('Cond')'
'{' (Statement)+ '}'
Cond::= [a-zA-Z0-9]+
Description::= [a-zA-Z0-9]+
the current file does not contain the required semantic logic.
Stepsis an ordered sequence of concrete actions used to realize
the goal. Each step corresponds to aStatement, which may
be either a simple natural-language sentence (i.e.,SimpleStmt)
or a control structure (i.e.,WhileStmt,IfStmt, orForStmt).
Each control structure contains aCondand a nested list of
Statementenclosed in brackets{}. This indicates that when
Condevaluates to true, the enclosed statements are executed.
Finally,Descriptiondenotes a natural-language sentence.
Compared to the pseudocode styles proposed for educa-
tional purposes [49], our grammar is deliberately simpler: it
includes only the minimal set of branch and loop control
structures, while all other aspects are expressed in natural
language. This design offers several advantages. First, it re-
duces the learning curve for humans, as the pseudocode closely
resembles everyday language and avoids additional syntactic
burdens such as explicit variable declarations or rigid typing
rules. Second, it provides enough structural scaffolding to
help LLMs avoid common pitfalls, such as misinterpreting
the intended control flow or introducing spurious logic. Third,
the separation between the high-levelGoaland the procedural
Stepsmirrors how developers naturally think about code: they
start with an overall objective and then refine it into smaller,
executable actions.
V. EVALUATIONSETUP
A. Design
To evaluate our system, we conducted a user study that em-
ployed a within-subjects design with two conditions,Claude
Code, which is a source-code interaction with an LLM
assistant, and CODEZOOM, which is our pseudocode-based
semantic-zooming workflow, layered on the same LLM as-
sistant. Each participant completed both conditions; order
(Claude Code-first versus CODEZOOM-first) was counterbal-
anced across participants. Each participant solved the same
two programming tasks under each condition. The primary
confirmatory hypothesis and analysis plan were pre-registered
prior to data collection. The report is available here: https:
//aspredicted.org/hi97f8.pdf.

=== PAGE 6 ===
a) Baseline system:The control condition used Claude
Code v2.1.84 with Claude Sonnet 4.6, which was the latest
default model at the time of the study. The CODEZOOM
condition was built on top of the same version of Claude Code
with the same underlying model, so that the two conditions
differ only in the pseudocode interface layer.
b) Tasks:Participants completed two programming tasks
per condition, selected to cover complementary scenarios
described in Section III. To prevent cognitive fatigue from
confounding our results [7], [16], we limited the study to two
tasks per participant. This approach prioritizes precise behav-
ioral observation over broad task generalization, a standard
methodological trade-off in empirical software engineering
research [39].T1 – Greenfield implementationasked partic-
ipants to implement the sliding-tile puzzle2048from scratch,
matching the behavior of a provided reference binary; T1
primarily exercises design-time control.T2 – Feature request
in an existing codebaseasked participants to implement a
feature request for the LLM fine-tuning framework Instruct-
Lab (PR #3286) 1: adding defaultstudent_model_idand
teacher_model_idfields to thegeneralconfiguration
section and propagating them through data generation and
training so they take effect unless overridden via the command
line. T2 primarily involved code comprehension and targeted
modification in an unfamiliar multi-file repository. A recent
study [10] showed that T2 is challenging, as all existing LLM-
based coding agents cannot successfully solve it.
c) Procedure:Sessions were run in person on identical
hardware and were proctored by the research team. Due to a
limited pool of Claude Code accounts, participants were sched-
uled in pairs per session. Each session lasted60minutes and
began with a5-minute tool-orthogonal tutorial on the condition
to which the participant was first assigned. Participants com-
pleted the post-condition portion of the survey immediately
after each condition, and a final overall-impressions section
after both conditions were complete. Each participant received
an honorarium equivalent to approximately30USD.
B. Participants
32 participants from two local universities signed up for
our study, of whichN=26attended. The mean age was
24.6years (SD= 2.02; one participant did not report age).
Gender distribution was14male,10female,1non-binary,
and1not reported. The participants were all master’s students
in computer science or a related subject. Study year was
approximately balanced (1st year:9; 2nd year:9; 3rd year or
later:7;1not reported). Self-reported programming experience
was high (14reported>5years;10reported3–5years;1
reported1–2years;1not reported), and LLM-tool usage was
frequent (8used them daily,13weekly,3monthly,1never,1
not reported). Order assignment was balanced:13participants
completed the Claude Code condition first and13completed
the CODEZOOMcondition first.
1https://github.com/instructlab/instructlab/pull/3286
C. Instruments
After each condition, participants completed a survey book-
let comprising the System Usability Scale [8]; 10 items scored
on a 0–100 scale, where scores above68indicate above-
average usability and above80.3indicate excellent usability;
the NASA Task Load Index (NASA-TLX) [19]; six subscales
rated 0–100 in steps of5; a self-report of code understand-
ing (CU, 7-point Likert); and two code-revision items (CR-
Locate and CR-Ease, both 7-point Likert). The CODEZOOM
booklet also contained a 7-point rating of zoom-command
helpfulness (CZ-Zoom) and two 7-point agreement items on
whether CODEZOOMimproves understanding (CZ-Compare-
Understand) and revision (CZ-Compare-Revise) relative to
working with source code directly (see Figure 5). To con-
textualize the responses, students were also invited to answer
freeform questions on when CODEZOOMwas particularly
helpful or unhelpful, and how CODEZOOMcould be improved.
D. Protocol Amendment
After the first week of data collection, we amended the
survey in two ways, which affected participants11–26:
1)Addition of an actual-learning measure (RQ2, below).
The pre-registered confirmatory measure (CU) is aself-
reportof understanding. We realized that behavioral
evidence of code awareness would be a useful com-
plement to this subjective measure, because self-reports
can dissociate from actual comprehension. We therefore
added two task-specific multiple-choice content questions
per condition (“QT1” and “QT2”), each with eight answer
options, to probe participants’ knowledge of the codebase.
2)Rewording of the agency/control item.In the origi-
nal booklet, the CODEZOOM-section item read, “I felt
in control of the design decisions when working with
CODEZOOM, as opposed to having Claude make all
decisions for me” (agree/disagree, 7-point). We realized
that this framing is biased and unsatisfactory because it
presupposes that Claude “makes all decisions” for the
user, which primes agreement with CODEZOOM. We
replaced it with a bipolar comparison item administered
once after both conditions: “Under which programming
mode did you feel more in control of your design
decisions?” anchored by1 =Claude Code and7 =
CODEZOOM.
These changes are deviations from the pre-registered pro-
tocol. We report them here in full and treat all analyses
that depend on them (RQ2; the bipolar control item) as
exploratory and restricted to participants11–26(n=16). The
other pre-registered measures (CU, SUS, NASA-TLX, CR-
Locate, CR-Ease, CZ-Zoom, CZ-Compare-Understand, CZ-
Compare-Revise) were not affected and use the full sample
(N=26).
E. Research Questions
Our main research questions were:

=== PAGE 7 ===
RQ1Do participants using CODEZOOMreport higher
self-rated code understanding than when using Claude
Code alone?
RQ2Do participants using CODEZOOMshow higher ac-
tual code awareness, as measured by multiple-choice
content questions about the codebase, than when using
Claude Code alone?
RQ1 was pre-registered as the confirmatory hypothesis;
RQ2 was added as a secondary, pre-specified hypothesis
during a protocol amendment after the first week of data
collection, with its measure and analysis plan fixed before any
of then= 16amended-protocol data were collected.
We also had exploratory comparisons, which were pre-
registered as secondary. We computed paired comparisons of
SUS total scores, NASA-TLX and its subscale ratings, CR-
Locate, and CR-Ease between conditions. Within the CODE-
ZOOMcondition, we further report CZ-Zoom, CZ-Compare-
Understand, and CZ-Compare-Revise (each tested against the
neutral midpoint of4), and the bipolar control-preference
item (tested against4, with1 =Claude Code and7 =
CODEZOOM).
F . Analysis Plan
The confirmatory test for RQ1 was a paired-samplest-test
on the code understanding question (CU), with a Wilcoxon
signed-rank test substituted if the normality assumption on the
difference scores was violated (Shapiro–Wilk,α=.05). The
same rule was applied to all exploratory paired comparisons.
Effect sizes are reported as Cohen’sdfort-tests and the
matched-pairs rank-biserial correlationr rb for Wilcoxon tests.
For single-sample items, we report one-samplet-tests against
the scale midpoint (4) with Wilcoxon as a robustness check.
Per the pre-registered exclusion rule, participants who failed
to complete both conditions were excluded; none of the
analyzed26had missing data on the pre-registered primary
outcomes. All tests are two-sided; we do not adjust for
multiple comparisons given the exploratory framing of the
secondary analyses, but readers should interpret secondaryp-
values with that caveat in mind. Analyses were performed in
Python 3.14 usingpandasandscipy.stats.
VI. RESULTS
A. Self-Reported Code Understanding (RQ1)
Participants rated their code understanding substantially
higher in the CODEZOOMcondition (M= 5.50,SD= 1.10)
than in the Claude Code condition (M= 3.35,SD= 1.79),
a mean difference of2.15scale points (SD diff = 2.11;
M dndiff = 2). Twenty of26participants rated CODEZOOM
strictly higher than Claude Code on this item;4rated the two
equal and2rated Claude Code higher. Shapiro–Wilk on the
difference scores was not significant (W= 0.93,p=.081),
so the pre-registered paired-samplest-test was used as the
primary analysis. It showed a large and highly reliable effect
in favour of CODEZOOM,t(25) = 5.20,p < .001,d= 1.02.
A Wilcoxon signed-rank test, reported for robustness, reached
TABLE I
EXPLORATORY PAIRED COMPARISONS, CODEZOOM(CZ)VERSUS
CLAUDECODE(CC) (N=26). THEp-VALUES WERE NON-SIGNIFICANT
(>0.05).
Measure CCMCZM pEffect
SUS71.3 69.0 0.625−0.10
TLX: Aggregate27.7 32.1 0.211 0.25
CR-Locate4.3 5.0 0.057 0.53
CR-Ease5.2 5.4 0.480 0.19
the same conclusion,W= 9.00,p < .001,r rb = 0.93.RQ1
is supported.
B. Actual Code Awareness (RQ2)
Among the16participants (IDs11–26) who completed the
added content questions, correct-response rates were markedly
higher in the CODEZOOMcondition than in the Claude Code
condition on both items. On QT1 (algorithm used by the AI
mode), accuracy was62.5%after CODEZOOMand6.25%
after Claude Code; on QT2 (fallback source of the student
model ID), accuracy was50.0%after CODEZOOMand12.5%
after Claude Code. Aggregated, participants answered18of
32content questions correctly in CODEZOOMversus3of
32in Claude Code. Analyzed as per-participant sums (0–2),
the mean score was1.13(SD= 0.81) for CODEZOOMand
0.19(SD= 0.40) for Claude Code, a mean difference of
0.94(SD diff = 0.93). Shapiro–Wilk on the difference was
significant (W= 0.87,p=.028), so a Wilcoxon signed-rank
test was used as the primary analysis:W= 4.00,p=.005,
rrb = 0.90. The pairedt-test agreed,t(15) = 4.04,p=.001,
d= 1.01.
C. Exploratory: SUS, NASA-TLX, and Code Revision
Table I summarizes the exploratory paired comparisons.
There was no reliable difference in SUS total scores (Claude
CodeM= 71.25, CODEZOOMM= 69.04;t(25) =−0.50,
p=.62), and the point estimates suggest that participants
perceived the two environments to be similarly usable. On the
NASA-TLX, the CODEZOOMcondition was rated as requiring
more mental effort and greater overall effort: Mental Demand,
WilcoxonW= 89.0,p=.047; Effort,t(25) = 2.97,
p=.006,d= 0.58. Physical Demand was also rated higher
in CODEZOOM(WilcoxonW= 16.5,p=.042,r rb = 0.64),
though absolute levels on this subscale were low in both
conditions (Ms≤17). Temporal Demand, Performance, and
Frustration did not differ. The aggregate NASA-TLX score
was numerically higher in CODEZOOMbut not statistically
different (M= 32.1versus27.7,p=.21,d= 0.25). For the
code-revision items, CR-Locate was higher in CODEZOOM
(M= 5.04) than in Claude Code (M= 4.27), but with a
difference that was not significant by both the pre-registered
Wilcoxon (normality violated,W Shapiro = 0.90,p=.013;
WilcoxonW= 32.0,p=.057) and thet-test (t(25) = 2.02,
p=.055). CR-Ease did not differ between conditions (M=
5.15vs.5.35; Wilcoxonp=.48).

=== PAGE 8 ===
ID Question
Per-condition self-reports
CU I was able to understand the overall structure and logic of the codebase with confidence using [CC / CZ].
CR-Locate I was able to locate the relevant code sections efficiently using [CC / CZ].
CR-Ease It was easy to make the necessary code changes using [CC / CZ].
CZ-specific items
CZ-Zoom I felt thezoomcommand was helpful for understanding the codebase at different levels of abstraction.
CZ-Compare-Understand Compared with directly reading source code, CodeZoom makes it easier for developers to understand the
codebase.
CZ-Compare-Revise Compared with manually revising source code, CodeZoom facilitates more efficient localization and
modification of relevant code sections.
Agency/control item
Control (original, P1–10) I felt in control of the design decisions when working with CodeZoom, as opposed to having Claude make all
decisions for me.
Control (revised, P11–26) Under which programming mode did you feel more in control of your design decisions?
Actual-learning items
QT1 What algorithm is used in your implementation for the AI mode of 2048?
QT2 Before modification, if the student model ID is not provided via the CLI during data generation, where is the
student model retrieved from?
Fig. 5. Custom (non-standardised) survey items used in the study, in addition to the SUS [8] and NASA-TLX [19].
TABLE II
CODEZOOM-SPECIFIC ITEMS,TESTED AGAINST THE NEUTRAL MIDPOINT
OF4ON A7-POINT SCALE(N=26). THEpCOLUMN REPORTS THE PAIRED
ONE-SAMPLEt-TEST; WILCOXON SIGNED-RANK GIVESp < .001FOR
EACH ITEM AS WELL.
ItemM SD p
CZ-Zoom5.23 1.27< .001
CZ-Compare-Understand5.65 0.94< .001
CZ-Compare-Revise5.58 1.03< .001
D. Exploratory:CODEZOOM-Specific Items
All three CODEZOOM-specific items were rated well above
the neutral scale midpoint of4(Table II). Participants found
the zoom command helpful for understanding the codebase at
different levels of abstraction (M= 5.23,SD= 1.27;t(25) =
4.92,p < .001). They also agreed strongly that, compared with
directly reading source code, CODEZOOMmakes it easier to
understand the codebase (M= 5.65,SD= 0.94;t(25) =
9.01,p < .001), and that, compared with manually revising
source code, CODEZOOMfacilitates more efficient localisation
and modification of relevant sections (M= 5.58,SD= 1.03;
t(25) = 7.83,p < .001).
E. Exploratory: Agency/Control Preference
As noted in Section V-D, the original CZ-Control item is not
pooled with the bipolar version because they measure different
constructs. For completeness, we report both.
For the de-biasedbipolaritem administered to participants
11–26(n=16;1 =Claude Code,4 =neutral,7 =CODE-
ZOOM), mean preference was5.38(SD= 1.41,M dn= 5),
significantly above the neutral midpoint,t(15) = 3.91,p=
.001; WilcoxonW= 14.5,p=.005. A count-based summary
is informative:15of16participants expressed a preference to-
ward CODEZOOM,0were neutral, and1participant expressed
a preference toward Claude Code (rating= 1). For theoriginal
CODEZOOM-only biased item administered to participants1–
10, responses were9×6and1×5(M= 5.90,SD= 0.32;
range5–6), consistent with the interpretive concern that the
item’s framing suppressed disagreement.
F . Exploratory: Task Performance
For completeness, we also analyzed task performance. We
include task performance only on the second task (T2), since
T1 lacks an automatic oracle for comparing a participant’s
from-scratch 2048 implementation against the reference bi-
nary, whereas T2 provides ground truth via the corresponding
pull report (PR #3286) and the project’s existing test suite. On
T2, success rates were higher with CODEZOOM(M= 0.89,
SD= 0.32) than with Claude Code (M= 0.59,SD= 0.50).
Because the paired differences departed significantly from
normality (Shapiro-WilkW= 0.759,p < .001), we used a
Wilcoxon signed-rank test, which confirmed that participants
performed reliably better with CODEZOOMthan with Claude
Code (W= 13.00,z=−2.040,p=.024). A common
failure mode of Claude Code was modifying the wrong files.
InstructLab’s codebase contains LLM model-specific config-
uration layers that obscure the location of the InstructLab
configuration, making it difficult to localize the files relevant to
the task requirements. Additionally, we also observed several
instances in which Claude Code attempted to modify test files
rather than the corresponding implementation files.
G. Exploratory: Freeform Feedback
The free-form responses were broadly positive about CODE-
ZOOM’s core idea; roughly 21 of 26 respondents expressed a
favorable overall view. The clearest consensus forming around
the code-to-pseudocode direction as an aid to comprehension
(cited by 15 of 26). Participants repeatedly described the

=== PAGE 9 ===
pseudocode as a structural overview that made unfamiliar code
faster to grasp; one called it “a clear structure or ’map’ so
you can pinpoint specific information more easily,” another
noted that “the pseudocode in front of me was particularly
useful throughout as it made comprehension of the same code
base super fast,” and several reported that translating code
back to pseudocode helped them locate bugs more easily
than inspecting model output directly. The most consistent
criticism concerned the revision experience (raised by about
a third of respondents, or 9 of 26): editing pseudocode by
hand felt heavier than conversing with the model, as one
participant put it, “changing pseucode by hand is cumbersome
compared to Claude’s fast iteration... I think if zoom also was
helpful to edit pseucode it would benefit a lot.” Relatedly,
the most common improvement requests were for tighter
prompt-driven editing of pseudocode, automatic synchroniza-
tion between pseudocode and code, and more process feedback
while commands run. A minority were less convinced of
the abstraction itself (2–3 respondents); one preferred reading
the code directly, and another preferred a specification-based
intermediate layer over a pseudocode-based one.
H. Sensitivity Analysis
As our study was within-subjects and is therefore suscepti-
ble to learning or priming effects, we ran a sensitivity check on
RQ1 and RQ2, using between-subjects comparisons restricted
to each participant’s first condition only: the13participants
who saw Claude Code first contribute their Claude Code
responses, the13who saw CODEZOOMfirst contribute their
CODEZOOMresponses, and no participant contributes to both
arms. Both effects survive atp < .05. For RQ1 (self-rated code
understanding), Welch’st(22.8) = 3.36,p=.003, Cohen’s
d= 1.32(M ClaudeCode = 3.54,M CODEZOOM = 5.69); the
rank-based Mann–Whitney test agrees,U= 141.5,p=.003.
For RQ2 (actual code-awareness score, restricted to partici-
pants11–26for whom the content questions were adminis-
tered,n= 8per arm), Welch’st(10.3) = 4.02,p=.002,
Cohen’sd= 2.01(M ClaudeCode = 0.13,M CODEZOOM = 1.25
out of2; Mann–WhitneyU= 57.5,p=.004). The point es-
timates of effect size are larger between-subjects than within-
subjects, despite the smaller and unpaired sample. We take
this as evidence that the primary findings are not artifacts of
within-subject carryover.
VII. DISCUSSION
Interpretation.In our study, we compared CODEZOOM
against a programming environment where the participants had
unrestricted access to AI support. Our two primary measures,
namely self-rated understanding (RQ1) and objective code
awareness (RQ2), were strongly in favor of CODEZOOM
(d≈1.0,p <0.05). Furthermore,15/16participants preferred
CODEZOOMon the de-biased agency item. Against that,
SUS was indistinguishable between conditions (p=.62),
and subscales of the NASA-TLX showed that CODEZOOM
required significantly more mental effort (Mental Demand
p=.047; Effortd= 0.58,p=.006). Our results lend some
support to the thesis that CODEZOOMcan help mitigate risks
that are sometimes introduced by AI-augmented programming
workflows, namely that developers can lose agency of their
work and lack an understanding of their own code. At the
same time, this cost did not translate into worse coding
outcomes: participants in fact performed materially better with
CODEZOOMthan in the unrestricted-AI baseline. Our data
provides some indication that at least for some programming
tasks, CODEZOOMcan help the developer recover the grasp
of their own code without sacrificing the productivity gains
that motivate AI-augmented workflows in the first place.
Zooming Behavior.While subjective ratings indicate that
participants found the zoom command helpful (M= 5.23), we
further analyzed their interaction patterns. Every participant
executed at least one zoom-in operation. We observed that
participants frequently requested to expand specific lines of
pseudocode immediately after generating it from the source
code. For example, in T1 (2048), after implementing modifi-
cations, participants regenerated the pseudocode and zoomed
in on the AI execution block to inspect how the next move
was calculated. This enabled them to confirm algorithmic
choices (e.g., expectimax) that may otherwise be obfuscated
in the initial coarse pseudocode. Conversely, this zoom-out
behavior frequently occurred after multiple consecutive zoom-
in operations to effectively reset the cognitive context. These
behavioral patterns confirm that semantic zooming was utilized
not merely as a static reading aid, but as an active, dynamic
tool to negotiate the abstraction level required for specific
comprehension and modification tasks.
Scope.CODEZOOMis designed to improve the controllabil-
ity of code generation by providing a new communication
interface between humans and LLMs, complementing rather
than replacing existing LLM-based coding agents. Our goal
is to give developers tighter control over the semantic logic
of the generated program so that it faithfully follows their
intent. Accordingly, we target experienced programmers who
already have a clear picture of how their code should be
structured, rather than non-experts who rely on LLMs to
propose solutions for coding, such as fixing language-level
syntax errors or simple bugs. For such experienced developers,
CODEZOOMoffers a structured medium in which to specify
semantics precisely, enabling LLMs to generate more accurate
code with less back-and-forth. We therefore view CODEZOOM
as a layer that augments agents such as Claude Code, and
we expect practitioners to continue relying on the agent’s
native capabilities for issues that lie below the semantic layer
CODEZOOMcaptures, such as build-error diagnostics, test-
driven iteration, and runtime debugging.
Necessity.CODEZOOMremains necessary even as LLMs
become more capable. CODEZOOMtargetscontrollability:
how developers communicate with LLM agents, rather than the
models’ raw coding ability. These two dimensions are largely
orthogonal. Even a model with perfect coding skills cannot
infer a developer’s intent beyond what is explicitly communi-
cated. However, natural language is inherently underspecified
for program semantics: the same English instruction may cor-

=== PAGE 10 ===
respond to many valid implementations that differ in control
flow, data structures, or edge-case behavior. Stronger models
may generate more plausible code from vague prompts, but
plausibility does not guarantee fidelity to intent, and this gap
becomes harder to detect when outputs are consistently fluent.
CODEZOOMaddresses this challenge by providing developers
with a structured medium to express intent precisely and
to validate the generated code against it. If anything, more
capable models further increase its value: they can follow
precise specifications more faithfully, while also scaling the
risk of confidently incorrect code from underspecified prompts.
Throughput.The main performance overhead of CODEZOOM
is the latency of the LLM round-trip: every zoom, revision,
and code–pseudocode synchronization requires at least one
call to the underlying agent. Currently, each call passes the
relevant source file together with its pseudocode counterpart,
which is acceptable for the single-file or few-file programs
used in our study. CODEZOOMtypical responses complete
within a few seconds, but will not scale naively to repositories
of thousands of files. Reducing this cost will require smarter
prompt construction, such as selectively including only the
portions of the repository that the navigation file identifies as
relevant to the current edit, and caching pseudocode across
calls so that unchanged files are not re-translated.
Threats to validity.Our study has some limitations. The
within-subjects design could cause carryover effects, since
participants solved the same tasks under both conditions;
counterbalancing and the between-subjects sensitivity analysis
(Section VI-H) mitigate this to some extent. A single 60-
minute lab session with a tool built by the authors could have
introduced novelty effects and acquiescence bias. Our study
was conducted with master’s students from two universities
in the same geographic region. The results may differ for
more experienced developers, who may exhibit different work
pacing, interruption patterns, or toolchain integration practices.
The CODEZOOMsystem might be less effective for different
tasks; we do not claim that it is a general-purpose solution for
all software development tasks, but rather that pseudocode-
based semantic zooming is a promising design point for tasks
centered on code comprehension and targeted modification; we
consider our two tasks to be representative instances of that.
We also note that both conditions used a single underlying
model (Claude Sonnet 4.6) and Claude Code version; the size
of CODEZOOM’s benefit may shift with future models.
VIII. RELATEDWORK
a) From code to pseudocode:A complementary research
direction is translating source code into pseudocode to support
code comprehension. Early work in this area primarily relied
on rule-based methods. For example, Sridharaet al. analyzed
function definitions using predefined heuristics to generate
summary comments [37], [38], Buseet al. designed heuristic
rules to summarize execution specifications [9], and Moreno
et al. focused on summarizing class definitions with similar
techniques [30]. While these approaches can produce accurate
summaries when their rules align well with the input, they
demand significant manual effort to design and are difficult
to generalize across programming languages and projects.
More recently, with the advent of LLM, data-driven methods
have been proposed to automatically convert source code into
pseudocode. Odaet al. applied statistical machine translation
techniques to this task [31], while Aloklaet al. fine-tuned
BART [26] and proposed a retrieval-augmented transformer
for pseudocode generation [2], [3]. Other works demonstrate
the utility of pseudocode in educational contexts [23], or
directly leverage LLMs for generation [17], [51]. Building on
these efforts, CODEZOOMexploits the generative capability of
LLMs to directly translate source code into pseudocode, while
introducing semantic zooming to improve comprehension.
b) From pseudocode to code:Similarly, recent research
has explored diverse approaches for translating pseudocode
into executable source code. Search-based methods such as
SPoC leverage compiler feedback to iteratively refine candi-
date programs [25]. Machine learning approaches have also
been widely studied: Acharjeeet al. employ a sequence-to-
sequence model for pseudocode-to-code translation [1]. More
recently, transformer-based methods have gained traction, with
C3PO introducing a lightweight Copy–Generate–Combine
mechanism [43], and retrieval-based transformers enhanc-
ing translation through external memory [3]. Complementary
efforts include survey work highlighting transformer-based
translation of pseudocode into Python [42]. Coladder [52] es-
tablishes a unidirectional, multi-layer translation from prompts
to source code. In this work, we establish a bidirectional
translation between pseudocode and executable source code
for efficient control of the code.
c) LLM for software engineering:A relevant and broader
research direction is leveraging large language models (LLMs)
to address problems in software engineering. A recent sur-
vey reports that over one hundred papers have already been
published in this area [27]. For example, Elicitation [4]
and SpecGen [29] employ LLMs to mine user requirements
as comprehensively as possible. CodePlan [6] and Agent-
Coder [20] adopt multi-agent systems to decompose user
requirements into sub-tasks for code generation. Furthermore,
SWE-bench [21] has become a widely used benchmark for
evaluating LLMs on real-world bug fixing. In contrast to these
works, our work focus on the controllability of code writing.
IX. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we introducedCode Semantic Zooming, a
paradigm for LLM-assisted code writing that uses pseudocode
as a zoomable intermediate layer between developers and
coding agents. Our approach pairs a deliberately minimal
EBNF grammar for pseudocode with a bidirectional translation
to source code, and adds a semantic zoom operation that lets
developers dynamically adjust the level of abstraction at which
they read and edit a program. We realized this concept in
CODEZOOM, implemented as a portable set of skills on top
of Claude Code, and evaluated it in a within-subjects user
study with 26 graduate students on two complementary tasks:
a greenfield 2048 implementation and a feature-addition task

=== PAGE 11 ===
in an existing InstructLab codebase. CODEZOOMmatched
Claude Code on usability while producing a large effect on
code comprehension (Cohen’sd= 1.02; 56% vs. 9% correct
on objective content questions) and a clear preference on
design control (>90% preference rate). We argue that this
work offers a novel perspective on LLM-assisted coding,
paving the way toward a more controllable, comprehensible,
and human-in-the-loop paradigm for software development.
REFERENCES
[1] Uzzal Kumar Acharjee, Minhazul Arefin, Kazi Mojammel Hossen,
Mohammed Nasir Uddin, Md. Ashraf Uddin, and Linta Islam. Sequence-
to-sequence learning-based conversion of pseudo-code to source code
using neural translation approach.IEEE Access, 10:26730–26742, 2022.
[2] Anas Alokla, Walaa Gad, Waleed Nazih, Mustafa Aref, and Abdel-
badeeh Salem. Pseudocode generation from source code using the bart
model.Mathematics, 10(21):3967, 2022.
[3] Anas Alokla, Walaa Gad, Waleed Nazih, Mustafa Aref, and Abdel-
Badeeh Salem. Retrieval-based transformer pseudocode generation.
Mathematics, 10(4):604, 2022.
[4] Mohammadmehdi Ataei, Hyunmin Cheong, Daniele Grandi, Ye Wang,
Nigel Morris, and Alexander Tessier. Elicitron: A large language model
agent-based simulation framework for design requirements elicitation.
J. Comput. Inf. Sci. Eng., 25(1), 2025.
[5] John W. Backus. The history of fortran i, ii, and III. InHistory of Pro-
gramming Languages, from the ACM SIGPLAN History of Programming
Languages Conference, June 1-3, 1978, Los Angeles, California, USA,
pages 25–74, 1978.
[6] Ramakrishna Bairi, Atharv Sonwane, Aditya Kanade, Vageesh D C,
Arun Iyer, Suresh Parthasarathy, Sriram Rajamani, Balasubramanyan
Ashok, and Shashank Shet. Codeplan: Repository-level coding using
llms and planning.Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering,
1(FSE):675–698, 2024.
[7] Tobias Baum, Kurt Schneider, and Alberto Bacchelli. Associating
working memory capacity and code change ordering with code review
performance.Empir. Softw. Eng., 24:1762–1798, 2019.
[8] John Brooke et al. SUS-a quick and dirty usability scale.Usability
evaluation in industry, 189(194):4–7, 1996.
[9] Raymond P. L. Buse and Westley Weimer. Automatic documentation
inference for exceptions. InProceedings of the ACM/SIGSOFT Interna-
tional Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis, ISSTA 2008, Seattle,
WA, USA, July 20-24, 2008, pages 273–282, 2008.
[10] Haorui Chen, Chengze Li, and Jia Li. Featbench: Towards more realistic
evaluation of feature-level code generation, 2026.
[11] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Pond ´e
de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas
Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger,
Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke
Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz
Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Fe-
lipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis,
Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-V oss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex
Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir
Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N.
Carr, Jan Leike, Joshua Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec
Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer,
Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya
Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large language models
trained on code.CoRR, abs/2107.03374, 2021.
[12] Ole-Johan Dahl, Edsger Wybe Dijkstra, and Charles Antony Richard
Hoare.Structured programming. Academic Press Ltd., 1972.
[13] C. J. Date.A Guide to the SQL Standard, Second Edition. 1989.
[14] Alexandre Decan, Tom Mens, and Philippe Grosjean. An empirical com-
parison of dependency network evolution in seven software packaging
ecosystems.Empirical Software Engineering, 24(1):381–416, 2019.
[15] Edsger W. Dijkstra. Letters to the editor: go to statement considered
harmful.Commun. ACM, 11:147–148, 1968.
[16] Thomas Fritz, Andrew Begel, Sebastian C. M ¨uller, Serap Yigit-Elliott,
and Manuela Z¨uger. Using psycho-physiological measures to assess task
difficulty in software development. In36th International Conference on
Software Engineering, ICSE ’14, Hyderabad, India - May 31 - June 07,
2014, pages 402–413, 2014.
[17] Walaa Gad, Anas Alokla, Waleed Nazih, Mustafa Aref, and Abdel-
badeeh Salem. Dlbt: Deep learning-based transformer to generate
pseudo-code from source code.Computers, Materials & Continua,
70(2), 2022.
[18] Michael Hanus. Multi-paradigm declarative languages. InLogic Pro-
gramming, 23rd International Conference, ICLP 2007, Porto, Portugal,
September 8-13, 2007, Proceedings, volume 4670, pages 45–75, 2007.
[19] Sandra G Hart and Lowell E Staveland. Development of NASA-TLX
(task load index): Results of empirical and theoretical research. In
Advances in psychology, volume 52, pages 139–183. Elsevier, 1988.
[20] Dong Huang, Qingwen Bu, Jie M. Zhang, Michael Luck, and Heming
Cui. Agentcoder: Multi-agent-based code generation with iterative
testing and optimisation.CoRR, abs/2312.13010, 2023.
[21] Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin
Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R. Narasimhan. Swe-bench: Can language
models resolve real-world github issues? InThe Twelfth International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria,
May 7-11, 2024, 2024.
[22] Alan C. Kay. The early history of smalltalk. InHistory of Pro-
gramming Languages Conference (HOPL-II), Preprints, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA, April 20-23, 1993, pages 69–95, 1993.
[23] Majeed Kazemitabaar, Runlong Ye, Xiaoning Wang, Austin Zachary
Henley, Paul Denny, Michelle Craig, and Tovi Grossman. Codeaid:
Evaluating a classroom deployment of an llm-based programming as-
sistant that balances student and educator needs. InProceedings of the
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI 2024,
Honolulu, HI, USA, May 11-16, 2024, pages 650:1–650:20, 2024.
[24] Donald Ervin Knuth. Literate programming.The computer journal,
27(2):97–111, 1984.
[25] Sumith Kulal, Panupong Pasupat, Kartik Chandra, Mina Lee, Oded
Padon, Alex Aiken, and Percy Liang. Spoc: Search-based pseudocode
to code. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32:
Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2019,
NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pages
11883–11894, 2019.
[26] Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdel-
rahman Mohamed, Omer Levy, Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
BART: denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training for natural language
generation, translation, and comprehension. InProceedings of the 58th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL
2020, Online, July 5-10, 2020, pages 7871–7880, 2020.
[27] Junwei Liu, Kaixin Wang, Yixuan Chen, Xin Peng, Zhenpeng Chen,
Lingming Zhang, and Yiling Lou. Large language model-based agents
for software engineering: A survey.CoRR, abs/2409.02977, 2024.
[28] John W. Lloyd. Practical advtanages of declarative programming. In
1994 Joint Conference on Declarative Programming, GULP-PRODE’94
Pe˜niscola, Spain, September 19-22, 1994, Volume 1, pages 18–30, 1994.
[29] Lezhi Ma, Shangqing Liu, Yi Li, Xiaofei Xie, and Lei Bu. Specgen:
Automated generation of formal program specifications via large lan-
guage models. In47th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software
Engineering, ICSE 2025, Ottawa, ON, Canada, April 26 - May 6, 2025,
pages 16–28, 2025.
[30] Laura Moreno, Jairo Aponte, Giriprasad Sridhara, Andrian Marcus,
Lori L. Pollock, and K. Vijay-Shanker. Automatic generation of natural
language summaries for java classes. InIEEE 21st International
Conference on Program Comprehension, ICPC 2013, San Francisco,
CA, USA, 20-21 May, 2013, pages 23–32, 2013.
[31] Yusuke Oda, Hiroyuki Fudaba, Graham Neubig, Hideaki Hata, Sakriani
Sakti, Tomoki Toda, and Satoshi Nakamura. Learning to generate
pseudo-code from source code using statistical machine translation (T).
In Myra B. Cohen, Lars Grunske, and Michael Whalen, editors,30th
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineer-
ing, ASE 2015, Lincoln, NE, USA, November 9-13, 2015, pages 574–584.
IEEE Computer Society, 2015.
[32] Richard E. Pattis. Teaching EBNF first in CS 1. In Robert Beck and Don
Goelman, editors,Proceedings of the 25th SIGCSE Technical Symposium
on Computer Science Education, SIGCSE 1994, Phoenix, Arizona, USA,
March 10-12, 1994, pages 300–303. ACM, 1994.
[33] Tim Rentsch. Object oriented programming.ACM Sigplan Notices,
17(9):51–57, 1982.
[34] Dennis M Ritchie, Stephen C Johnson, ME Lesk, BW Kernighan, et al.
The c programming language.Bell Sys. Tech. J, 57(6):1991–2019, 1978.

=== PAGE 12 ===
[35] Geoffrey G. Roy. Designing and explaining programs with a literate
pseudocode.ACM J. Educ. Resour. Comput., 6:1, 2006.
[36] Jean E. Sammet. The early history of COBOL.ACM SIGPLAN Notices,
13:121–161, 1978.
[37] Giriprasad Sridhara, Emily Hill, Divya Muppaneni, Lori L. Pollock,
and K. Vijay-Shanker. Towards automatically generating summary
comments for java methods. InASE 2010, 25th IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering, Antwerp, Belgium,
September 20-24, 2010, pages 43–52, 2010.
[38] Giriprasad Sridhara, Lori L. Pollock, and K. Vijay-Shanker. Automat-
ically detecting and describing high level actions within methods. In
Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Software Engi-
neering, ICSE 2011, Waikiki, Honolulu , HI, USA, May 21-28, 2011,
pages 101–110, 2011.
[39] Klaas-Jan Stol and Brian Fitzgerald. Guidelines for conducting software
engineering research. InContemporary Empirical Methods in Software
Engineering, pages 27–62. 2020.
[40] Bjarne Stroustrup. An overview of c++. InProceedings of the
1986 SIGPLAN workshop on Object-oriented programming, pages 7–
18, 1986.
[41] Nimit Thaker and Abhilash Shukla. Python as multi paradigm pro-
gramming language.International Journal of Computer Applications,
177(31):38–42, 2020.
[42] Satya Prakash Tiwari, Shivam Prasad, and MG Thushara. Machine
learning for translating pseudocode to python: A comprehensive review.
In2023 7th International Conference on Intelligent Computing and
Control Systems (ICICCS), pages 274–280. IEEE, 2023.
[43] Vishruth Veerendranath, Vibha Masti, Prajwal Anagani, and Mamatha
HR. C3PO: A lightweight copying mechanism for translating pseu-
docode to code. InProceedings of the 2nd Conference of the Asia-
Pacific Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
12th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing,
AACL/IJCNLP 2022 - Student Research Workshop, Online, November
20, 2022, pages 47–53, 2022.
[44] Website. Claude code. https://www.anthropic.com/claude-code, 2025.
Accessed: 2025-09-08.
[45] Website. Codex. https://openai.com/codex/, 2025. Accessed: 2025-09-
08.
[46] Website. Copilot. https://github.com/features/copilot, 2025. Accessed:
2025-09-08.
[47] Website. Cursor. https://cursor.com/, 2025. Accessed: 2025-09-08.
[48] Website. Gemini cli. https://cloud.google.com/gemini/docs/codeassist/
gemini-cli, 2025. Accessed: 2025-09-08.
[49] Website. Pseudocode guide for teach-
ers. https://www.cambridgeinternational.org/Images/
697401-2026-pseudocode-guide-for-teachers.pdf, 2025. Accessed:
2025-09-08.
[50] Website. Vibe coding. https://x.com/karpathy/status/
1886192184808149383, 2025. Accessed: 2025-09-08.
[51] Guang Yang, Yanlin Zhou, Xiang Chen, and Chi Yu. Fine-grained
pseudo-code generation method via code feature extraction and trans-
former. In28th Asia-Pacific Software Engineering Conference, APSEC
2021, Taipei, Taiwan, December 6-9, 2021, pages 213–222, 2021.
[52] Ryan Yen, Jiawen Stefanie Zhu, Sangho Suh, Haijun Xia, and Jian
Zhao. Coladder: Manipulating code generation via multi-level blocks.
InProceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology, UIST 2024, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, October 13-
16, 2024, pages 11:1–11:20, 2024.
[53] Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Zican Dong, Yupeng
Hou, Beichen Zhang, Yingqian Min, Junjie Zhang, Peiyu Liu, et al.
A survey of large language models.Frontiers of Computer Science,
20(12):2012627, 2026.